Evaluation Report: Write initial evaluation report of Playwright (#86)
hariclerry/mediawiki: tests/playwright/Report.md

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

## Introduction

> **Automation testing**

Reviewer: Is `**Automation testing**` a subsection here? It's not a big deal, but the text says "Automation testing Automation testing..." 😄

Author: Got it. Thanks

> Automation testing is a way to automate one's browser by simulating user actions like clicks. As Software or applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done, this ranges from unit testing to end to end testing of the application. Browser automation frameworks to perform end-to-end testing helps to ascertain the stability and the health of the application which in turn leads to the success of the application when on production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps detects bugs, among other benefits, thus increasing application productivity. Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks;

Reviewer: The official term is "test automation", not "automation testing". I know it's a small difference, but it's important to get the terms correct.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_automation

Author: Got it. Thanks for the correction.

- Selenium
- Puppeteer
- Cypress
- Playwright(maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers)

### Project Context

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for potential replacement of [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) with one of the best non-selenium modern automation testing framwork. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories as well as extensions. In order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Microsoft Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer: > repositories as well as extensions

I'm not sure why you are making a difference here. Most mediawiki extensions are git repositories. I would pick either repositories or extensions, no need to mention both.

Author: Noted. Thanks

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the automation testing, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundations and also one of my mentors. In search for a potential replacement of WebdriverIO, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and one of my mentors, they can be found using the links below;

Reviewer: I would mention Soham's last name too. 😄

Reviewer 2: Just leaving a note here, we are not in a need for a potential replacement. WebdriverIO is really powerful but we just want to ensure we are using the right tools that make testing easy for us to maintain and our developers to write. Might want to make that bit sound appropriately 😁

- [Cypress](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-06-29-fanboying-cypress/)- to be confirmed and changed

> - [Puppeteer](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/)

Reviewer: I would say link in line 15 was just a mid-internship thoughts about Cypress. The link in line 16 is the final evaluation of both Cypress and Puppeteer. @und3fined-v01d is that correct?

Author: Noted. Thanks

Reviewer 2: Yessss that would be correct

So, this brings us to the current framework which is [Microsoft Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright) being evaluated against WebdriverIO. The project involved;

> - Configuring and Setting up of Wikimedia-core to run on CI, in this case on Github actions.

Reviewer: Wikimedia is the name of the movement, mediawiki is the name of the software. I know it's confusing. 😆

Author: I missed the mark.lol

- Implementation of all Wikimedia-core tests in Playwright

### Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

> [WebdriverIO](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio) WebdriverIO is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the Webdriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;

Reviewer: Why WebdriverIO twice?

Extendable
Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful

Compatible
WebdriverIO can be run on the WebDriver Protocol for true cross-browser testing as well as Chrome DevTools Protocol for Chromium-based automation using Puppeteer.

Feature Rich
The huge variety of community plugins allows you to easily integrate and extend your setup to fulfill your requirements.

> The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capability, you can check out the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) documentation and the [Wikipedia Repo](https://github.com/wikimedia/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/selenium).

Reviewer: Instead of linking to https://github.com/wikimedia/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/selenium, I would link to https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium

Author: Noted. Thanks

[Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright) is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API. Playwright is known for the following capability;

Test across all modern browsers
Single API to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit.

Use in your preferred language

> Use the Playwright API in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and, Java.

Reviewer: I thought Playwright is node/javascript only! This is a surpise.

Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen with using playwright;

- Console debug option which is very useful in an event when tests are failing anonymously.
- Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes
- Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill)
- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests
- Seamless integration with Jest.

Sample Page screenshot code

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in WebKit and saves the screenshot.

    `const playwright = require('playwright');

    (async () => {
        const browser = await webkit.launch();
        const context = await browser.newContext();
        const page = await context.newPage();
        await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/');
        await page.screenshot({ path: 'wikipedia-home-page.png' });
        await browser.close();

>     })();`

Reviewer: Something went wrong with code formatting. I don't think you need both 4 space indentation and backticks. I would recommend fenced code blocks:

https://github.github.com/gfm/#fenced-code-blocks

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

## Introduction

> Test automation is a way to automate one's browser by simulating user actions like clicks. As applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done, this ranges from unit testing to end to end testing of the application. Browser automation frameworks to perform end-to-end testing helps to ascertain the stability and the health of the application which in turn leads to the success of the application when on production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs, among other benefits, thus increasing application productivity. Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
frameworks:
```

> Test automation is a way to automate one's browser by simulating user actions like clicks. As applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done, this ranges from unit testing to end to end testing of the application. Browser automation frameworks to perform end-to-end testing helps to ascertain the stability and the health of the application which in turn leads to the success of the application when on production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs, among other benefits, thus increasing application productivity. Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test automation is a way to automate one's browser by simulating user actions like clicks. Applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations. There is always a need for thorough testing to be done. This ranges from unit testing to end-to-end testing of the application. Browser automation frameworks to perform end-to-end testing helps to ascertain the stability and the health of the application which in turn leads to the success of the application when on production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs, among other benefits, thus increasing application productivity. Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks:
```

A few minor suggestions, including formatting and shorter sentences. Let's use either `end-to-end` or `end to end`. Let's not mix the two.

> - Selenium

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Selenium
```

Markdown should be both human- and machine-readable. There should be a white-space around lists.

- Puppeteer
- Cypress

> - Playwright(maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Playwright

Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers.
```

Since other list items don't have descriptions, I would suggest commenting on playwright outside the list.

Author: Noted

> ### Project Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Project Context

```

There should be white space around headlines.

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for potential replacement of [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) with one of the best non-selenium modern test automation framwork. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Microsoft Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for potential replacement of [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) with one of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end-to-end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).
```

A typo. Also, I would suggest using only Playwright (instead of Microsoft Playwright), for simplicity.

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundations and also one of my mentors. In search for a potential replacement of WebdriverIO, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and, is also one of my mentors and Sim Tran(correct name to be verified). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. In search for a potential replacement of WebdriverIO, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and, is also one of my mentors and Sim T.H. Tran. These evaluations can be found in the links below;
```

Wikimedia Foundation, SimTran (https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran).

> - [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F)
> - [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/)
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F)
- [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/)

```

Add whitespace before the list, remove double whitespace after the list.

> So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is [Microsoft Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright), also known as Playwright. The evaluations progress involved the following steps;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright), also known as Playwright. The evaluations progress involved the following steps;
```

Playwright.

> - Configuring and Setting up of Wikimedia-core to run on CI, in this case on Github actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configuring and setting up of MediaWiki Core to run on CI, in this case on GitHub actions.
```

Minor wording. Let's use `MediaWiki Core`, according to https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Core

> - Implementation of all mediawiki-core tests in Playwright
> - Runing mediawiki-core tests in WebdriverIO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright
- Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO
```

Minor wording.

- Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability

### Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

> [WebdriverIO](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio) is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the Webdriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WebdriverIO](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio) is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the WebDriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;
```

WebDriver, according to https://www.selenium.dev/documentation/en/webdriver/

Author: Can you please elaborate on this?

> Extendable
> Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful
> 
> Compatible
> WebdriverIO can be run on the WebDriver Protocol for true cross-browser testing as well as Chrome DevTools Protocol for Chromium-based automation using Puppeteer.
> 
> Feature Rich
> The huge variety of community plugins allows you to easily integrate and extend your setup to fulfill your requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Extendable: Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful.
- Compatible: WebdriverIO can be run on the WebDriver Protocol for true cross-browser testing as well as Chrome DevTools Protocol for Chromium-based automation using Puppeteer.
- Feature Rich: The huge variety of community plugins allows you to easily integrate and extend your setup to fulfill your requirements.
```

Let's use a list here.

> The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capability, you can check out the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) documentation and the [Wikipedia Repo](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capability, you can check out the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) documentation and the [MediaWiki](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium) documentation.
```

Let's use MediaWiki here.

> [Microsoft Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright) is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API. Playwright is known for the following capability;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright) is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API. Playwright is known for the following capability;
```

Playwright.

> Test across all modern browsers
> Single API to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit.
> 
> Use in your preferred language
> Use the Playwright API in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and, Java.
> 
> Automate without trade-offs
> Capable automation for single-page apps that rely on the modern web platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Test across all modern browsers: Single API to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit.
- Use in your preferred language: Use the Playwright API in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and, Java.
- Automate without trade-offs: Capable automation for single-page apps that rely on the modern web platform.
```

Let's use a list here.

> The above points are just a few capabilities. To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) documentation and this [ forked Wikipedia Repo](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above points are just a few capabilities. To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) documentation and my [MediaWiki Core fork](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).
```

> While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers(Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing Screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, Video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers (Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing Screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.
```

Minor wording.

> Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen while using playwright;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen while using Playwright;
```

Playwright.

> - Console debug option which is very useful in an event when tests are failing anonymously.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "failing anonymously"?

Author: I meant without a clear error messages

- Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes
- Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill)
- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests
- Seamless integration with Jest.

> **Sample Page screenshot code**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Sample Page screenshot code
```

Let's use a header here.

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in WebKit and saves the screenshot.

> ```
>     const playwright = require('playwright');
> 
>     (async () => {
>         const browser = await webkit.launch();
>         const context = await browser.newContext();
>         const page = await context.newPage();
>         await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/');
>         await page.screenshot({ path: 'wikipedia-home-page.png' });
>         await browser.close();
>     })();
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
const playwright = require('playwright');

(async () => {
    const browser = await webkit.launch();
    const context = await browser.newContext();
    const page = await context.newPage();
    await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/');
    await page.screenshot({ path: 'wikipedia-home-page.png' });
    await browser.close();
})();
```
```

Let's specify the language and remove leading whitespace.

> **Playwright and Jest**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Playwright and Jest
```

Let's use a heading.

>  [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript Testing Framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript Testing Framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:
```

Remove leading whitespace.

Author: Noted

>  - Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support
>  - jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests
>  - expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support
- jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests
- expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions
```

Remove leading whitespace.

>  jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features availbale to be used at your disposal. it was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features available to be used at your disposal. It was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).
```

Leading whitespace, typo.

Author: Noted

>  **Example of jest-playwright.config.js**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example of `jest-playwright.config.js`
```

Heading.

> ```
>     module.exports = {
>         browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
>         devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"]
>     }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
module.exports = {
    browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
    devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"]
}
```
```

Specify language, leading whitespace.

Below are some great and useful functions that come with jest-playwright;

> Reset helper functions. This functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various resasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like, `resetPage(), resetContext() and resetBrowser()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reset helper functions. This functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various reasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like, `resetPage()`, `resetContext()` and `resetBrowser()`.
```

Typo, formatting.

Example usage of reset current browser

> ```
>     beforeEach(async () => {
>         await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser()
>     })
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
beforeEach(async () => {
    await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser()
})
```
```

Language, leading whitespace.

Debug helper functions. This help in debugging test incase there are test failure. It uses the `jestPlaywrightDebug()`

Example usage of Debug

> ```
>     test.jestPlaywrightDebug('failed', async ({ page }) => {
>         await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/')
>         const title = await page.title()
>         await expect(title).toBe('Nothing')
>     })
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
test.jestPlaywrightDebug('failed', async ({ page }) => {
    await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/')
    const title = await page.title()
    await expect(title).toBe('Nothing')
})
```
```

Language, whitespace.

For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright)

#### Playwright and WebdriverIO metrics

> **Statics on  WebdriverIO and Playwright Popularity**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Statics on  WebdriverIO and Playwright Popularity
```

Heading.

> ![Screenshot](statistics.png)

Reviewer: If this screenshot's job is to compare webdriverio and playwright, then remove all other tools. They are just adding noise. It's actually hard to find webdriverio and playwright on the chart and compare them.

> The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing some of the most popular automation test tools in terms of popularity. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing some of the most popular automation test tools. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.
```

There's no need for "popular" twice.

> **WebdriverIO and Playwright Mediawiki-core Tests Analysis**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### WebdriverIO and Playwright MediaWiki Core Tests Analysis
```

Heading.

![Screenshot](evaluation-chart.png)

> The above visaulised chart represents data that was collected by running mediawiki/core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 14 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 14 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.
```

Typo.

The chart shows data for 10 test runs, but the text mentions 14?

Author: Noted. Thanks

Author: I think I will need some clarity on this. Perhaps we can discuss this during standup?

> The tests were run 40 times in both framework to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consitency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tests were run 40 times in both framework to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consistency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.
```

Typo.

Again here you mention 40 test runs, but the chart only shows 10?

The above chart further shows that Playwright is much faster than WebdriverIO in terms of speed.
 

> ### Why adapt Playwright

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why adapt Playwright

```

Whitespace around headings.

> ### Why adapt Playwright
> Playwright offers some great reasons such as;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why adapt Playwright

Playwright offers some great reasons such as;
```

Whitespace around headings.

> Playwright offers some great reasons such as;
> - It's simple to set up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Playwright offers some great reasons such as;

- It's simple to set up
```

Whitespace around lists.

- Stable features. 
- Ability to install Chrome, Firefox or WebKit (Safari) automatically
- Bidirectional (events) – automating things like console logs is easy

> - Maintained by Microsoft people with experience maintaining Puppeteer

Reviewer: Do you have a reference for this? I thought Puppeteer was developed by Google and Playwright by Microsoft.

Author: Yes. So the same team that developed Puppeteer moved to Microsoft and developed Playwright.

> However, it also presents some cons such as; 
> - It is very new so the APIs are evolving
> - Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms
> - Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.
> ### Advantages and disadvantages of Migrating from WebdriverIO
> From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement and, Puppeteer and Microsoft Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed, Stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the Advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it also presents some cons such as; 

- It is very new so the APIs are evolving
- Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms
- Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.

### Advantages and disadvantages of Migrating from WebdriverIO

From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement and, Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed, Stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the Advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;
```

Whitespace. Playwright.

> *Advantages*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Advantages

```

Heading.

> - WebdriverIO is Javascript based and is  built over nodeJs just like Puppeteer and Microsoft Playwright thus it will be easier for developers since there would be no differences in programming language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- WebdriverIO is JavaScript based and is  built over Node.js just like Puppeteer and Playwright thus it will be easier for developers since there would be no differences in programming language.
```

JavaScript, according to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript.
Node.js , according to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js.
Playwright.

> *Disadvantages*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Disadvantages

```

Heading.

> - Investment in WebdriverIO tool. Most tests are already written in WebdriverIO and there are about 30 repositories being used by Mediawiki, so migrating from it to another tool would require a great deal of time and manpower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Investment in WebdriverIO tool. Most tests are already written in WebdriverIO. About 30 MediaWiki repositories use it, so migrating from it to another tool would require a great deal of time and manpower.
```

Simplify.

> - Update of documentation. Most documentations are already written and have references to  WebdriverIO. Updating the documentations would require some time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update of documentation. Most documentation is already written and has references to WebdriverIO. Updating the documentations would require some time.
```

Singular.

> ### What Next
> - Refactor the existing test
> - Evaluate Playwright against Puppeteer
> ### Summary
> Statistics show that Playwright is a better alternative tools over WebdriverIO in terms of speed. However, WebdriverIO seems to be a great tool given that it keeps evolving, new and modern features are being added to it and the community is still vibrant and supportive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What Next

- Refactor the existing test
- Evaluate Playwright against Puppeteer

### Summary

Statistics show that Playwright is a better alternative tools over WebdriverIO in terms of speed. However, WebdriverIO seems to be a great tool given that it keeps evolving, new and modern features are being added to it and the community is still vibrant and supportive.
```

Whitespace.

Also, summary should state that at the moment we don't plan to switch, but that can change in the future.

> ### Acknowledgement 
> The completion of this project wouldn't have been a success without the support of my mentors, Željko Filipin, Vidhi Mody and Soham Parekh. I do appreciate the constant guidance, meetings, advice, code reviews, challenging, pair programmings, to mention but a few, that were offered during the project execution. 
> ### References:
> - [puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose](https://www.testim.io/blog/puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose/)
> - [using-jest-with-playwright](https://playwright.tech/blog/using-jest-with-playwright)
> - [stateofjs](https://2020.stateofjs.com/en-US/technologies/testing/#testing_experience_ranking)
> - [playwright-community](https://github.com/playwright-community/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Acknowledgement 

The completion of this project wouldn't have been a success without the support of my mentors, Željko Filipin, Vidhi Mody and Soham Parekh. I do appreciate the constant guidance, meetings, advice, code reviews, challenging, pair programmings, to mention but a few, that were offered during the project execution.

### References

- [puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose](https://www.testim.io/blog/puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose/)
- [using-jest-with-playwright](https://playwright.tech/blog/using-jest-with-playwright)
- [stateofjs](https://2020.stateofjs.com/en-US/technologies/testing/#testing_experience_ranking)
- [playwright-community](https://github.com/playwright-community/)
```

Whitespace.

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

> 

Reviewer: Create a "contents" section with links to all headings. Example: https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium/Getting_Started/Run_tests_targeting_Beta_cluster

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

## Introduction

Test automation is a way to automate one's browser by simulating user actions like clicks. As applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done, this ranges from unit testing to end to end testing of the application. Browser automation frameworks to perform end-to-end testing helps to ascertain the stability and the health of the application which in turn leads to the success of the application when on production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs, among other benefits, thus increasing application productivity. Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks;
- Selenium
- Puppeteer
- Cypress
- Playwright

Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers.
### Project Context

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framwork. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).
```

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for mediawiki apps, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and, is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for mediawiki apps, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;
```
Minor punctuation

Author: Noted

So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright), also known as Playwright. The evaluations progress involved the following steps;

- Configuring and Setting up of Wikimedia-core to run on CI, in this case on Github actions.
- Implementation of all mediawiki-core tests in Playwright
- Runing mediawiki-core tests in WebdriverIO
- Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability

### Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

[WebdriverIO](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio) is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the Webdriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;
Extendable
Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful

Compatible
WebdriverIO can be run on the WebDriver Protocol for true cross-browser testing as well as Chrome DevTools Protocol for Chromium-based automation using Puppeteer.

Feature Rich
The huge variety of community plugins allows you to easily integrate and extend your setup to fulfill your requirements.

> The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capability, you can check out the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) documentation and the [Wikipedia Repo](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capabilities, you can check out the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) documentation and the [Wikipedia Repo](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).
```

- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests
- Seamless integration with Jest.

**Sample Page screenshot code**

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in WebKit and saves the screenshot.

```
    const playwright = require('playwright');

    (async () => {
        const browser = await webkit.launch();
        const context = await browser.newContext();
        const page = await context.newPage();
        await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/');
        await page.screenshot({ path: 'wikipedia-home-page.png' });
        await browser.close();
    })();
```

**Playwright and Jest**

[Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript Testing Framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:

- Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support
- jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests
- expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions

> jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features availbale to be used at your disposal. it was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features availbale to be used at your disposal. It was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).
```

**Example of jest-playwright.config.js**

```js
module.exports = {
    browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
    devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"]
}
```

Below are some great and useful functions that come with jest-playwright;

> Reset helper functions. This functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various resasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like, `resetPage(), resetContext() and resetBrowser()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Reset helper functions. These functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various resasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like, `resetPage(), resetContext() and resetBrowser()`.
```

Example usage of reset current browser

```js
beforeEach(async () => {
    await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser()
})
```

Debug helper functions. This help in debugging test incase there are test failure. It uses the `jestPlaywrightDebug()`

Example usage of Debug

```js
test.jestPlaywrightDebug('failed', async ({ page }) => {
    await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/')
    const title = await page.title()
    await expect(title).toBe('Nothing')
})
```

For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright)

#### Playwright and WebdriverIO metrics

##### Statics on  WebdriverIO and Playwright Popularity

![Screenshot](statistics.png)

The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing some of the most popular automation test tools. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.

##### WebdriverIO and Playwright Mediawiki-core Tests Analysis

![Screenshot](evaluation-chart.png)

> The above visaulised chart represents data that was collected by running mediawiki/core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The above visualised chart represents data that was collected by running mediawiki/core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.
```

> The tests were run 40 times in both framework to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consitency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The tests were run 40 times in both frameworks to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consistency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.
```

The above chart further shows that Playwright is much faster than WebdriverIO in terms of speed.

### Why adapt Playwright

Playwright offers some great reasons such as;

- It's simple to set up
- Stable features. 
- Ability to install Chrome, Firefox or WebKit (Safari) automatically
- Bidirectional (events) – automating things like console logs is easy
- Maintained by [Microsoft people](https://blog.logrocket.com/playwright-vs-puppeteer/) with experience maintaining Puppeteer

However, Playwright also presents some cons such as; 

- It is very new so the APIs are evolving
- Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms
- Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.

### Advantages and disadvantages of Migrating from WebdriverIO

> From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future and, Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed, Stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the Advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future and Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed, Stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the Advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;
```

#### Advantages

- WebdriverIO is [Javascript]( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript) based and is  built over [NodeJs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js) just like Puppeteer and Playwright thus it will be easier for developers since there would be no differences in programming language.

#### Disadvantages

- Investment in WebdriverIO tool. Most tests are already written in WebdriverIO. About 30 MediaWiki repositories use it, so migrating from it to another tool would require a great deal of time and manpower.
- Update of documentation. Most documentation is already written and has references to  WebdriverIO. Updating the documentation would require some time.

### What Next

- Refactor the existing test
- Evaluate Playwright against Puppeteer
### Summary

> Statistics show that Playwright is a better alternative tools over WebdriverIO in terms of speed. However, WebdriverIO seems to be a great tool given that it keeps evolving, new and modern features are being added to it and the community is still vibrant and supportive. As of the time of the evaluation, there are no plans to switch to a different test automation framework but this could change in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Statistics show that Playwright is a better alternative tool over WebdriverIO in terms of speed. However, WebdriverIO seems to be a great tool given that it keeps evolving, new and modern features are being added to it and the community is still vibrant and supportive. As of the time of the evaluation, there are no plans to switch to a different test automation framework but this could change in the future.
```

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

## Table of Contents

> [Introduction](#Introduction)

Reviewer: Is there a reason parts of table of contents are a list, and parts are not? For example this line (`Introduction`) is not a list, while `Sample Playwright Page screenshot code` is a list?

I would suggest that the entire table of contents is a list.

[Project Background](#project-background)

> [Playwright Vs WebdriverIO](#playwright-vs-webdriverIO)

Reviewer: I think having separate sections (with code samples) about playwright and webdriverio would be helpful, before comparing them.

Proposal:

*  Playwright
*  WebdriverIO
*  Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

What do you think?

Author: I think it is a good proposal. I will work on it. Thanks

> * [Sample Playwright Page screenshot code](#sample-playwright-page-screenshot-code)

Reviewer: If you have sample playwright code, it would make sense to have the same sample code in webdriverio.

Author: Noted

> * [Playwright and Jest](#playwright-and-jest)

Reviewer: I would recommend simplifying the titles. Since this section already talks about playwright, it would make sense to simplify the title to just `Jest`. Also, if you have Jest section while talking about playwright, it would make sense to have `Mocha` section when talking about webdriverio.

Author: Noted.

  * [Example of jest-playwright.config.js](#example-of-jest-playwright-config-js)

> * [Playwright and WebdriverIO metrics](#playwright-and-webdriverIO-metrics)

Reviewer: In the spirit of simple titles, I would suggest renaming this to just `Metrics`.

>   * [Statistics on WebdriverIO and Playwright Popularity](#statistics-on-webdriverIO-and-playwright-popularity)

Reviewer: In the spirit of simple titles, I would suggest renaming this to just `Statistics`.

>   * [WebdriverIO and Playwright Mediawiki Core Tests Analysis](#webdriverIO-and-playwright-mediawiki-core-tests-analysis)

Reviewer: In the spirit of simple titles, I would suggest renaming this to just `MediaWiki Core Test Suite`. (Please also notice spelling of MediaWiki.)

* [Why adapt Playwright](#why-adapt-playwright)

> * [Advantages and disadvantages of Migrating from WebdriverIO](#advantages-and-disadvantages-of-migrating-from-webdriverI)

Reviewer: In the spirit of simple titles, I would suggest renaming this to just `Migrating from WebdriverIO`. There are already sections `advantages` and `disadvantages`, it doesn't need to be repeated here.

Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks being used;

* Selenium
* Puppeteer
* Cypress
* Playwright

Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers.

## Project Background

The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for Mediawiki apps, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

Reviewer: MediaWiki.

```suggestion
At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki apps, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;
```

* [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F)
* [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/)

So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright). The evaluations progress involved the following steps;

* Configuring and Setting up of Wikimedia-core to run on CI, in this case on Github actions.

> * Implementation of all Mediawiki core tests in Playwright
> * Running Mediawiki core tests in WebdriverIO

Reviewer: Spelling is important.

```suggestion
* Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright
* Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO
```

The above points are just a few capabilities. To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) documentation and my [MediaWiki Core fork](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).

While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers(Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing Screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.

Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen while using Playwright;

* Console debug option which is very useful in an event when tests are failing with no clear error messages.
* Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes
* Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill)
* Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests
* Seamless integration with Jest.

> #### Sample Playwright Page screenshot code

Reviewer: The parent section is `##`, this section should be `###`, not `####`.

Please install markdownlint to help you find problems like this in the future.

https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DavidAnson.vscode-markdownlint

```suggestion
### Sample Playwright Page screenshot code
```

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in WebKit and saves the screenshot.

```js
const playwright = require("playwright");

(async () => {
 const browser = await webkit.launch();
 const context = await browser.newContext();
 const page = await context.newPage();
 await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
 await page.screenshot({ path: "wikipedia-home-page.png" });
 await browser.close();
})();
```

> #### Playwright and Jest

Reviewer: The parent section is `##`, this section should be `###`, not `####`.

```suggestion
### Playwright and Jest
```

[Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript Testing Framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:

* Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support
* jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests
* expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions

> jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features availbale to be used at your disposal. It was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).

Reviewer: Please install Code Spell Checker to help you find typos in the future.

https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=streetsidesoftware.code-spell-checker

```suggestion
jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features available to be used at your disposal. It was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).
```

##### Example of jest-playwright.config.js

```js
module.exports = {
 browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
 devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"],
};
```

Below are some great and useful functions that come with jest-playwright;

> Reset helper functions. These functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various resasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like, `resetPage(), resetContext() and resetBrowser()`.

Reviewer: Typo. Spelling is important.

Also, each function name should be highlighted as code separately.

```suggestion
Reset helper functions. These functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various reasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like, `resetPage()`, `resetContext()` and `resetBrowser()`.
```

Example usage of reset current browser

```js
beforeEach(async () => {
 await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser();
});
```

Debug helper functions. This help in debugging test incase there are test failure. It uses the `jestPlaywrightDebug()`

Example usage of Debug

```js
test.jestPlaywrightDebug("failed", async ({ page }) => {
 await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
 const title = await page.title();
 await expect(title).toBe("Nothing");
});
```

For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright)

#### Playwright and WebdriverIO metrics

##### Statistics on WebdriverIO and Playwright Popularity

![Screenshot](statistics.png)

The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing some of the most popular automation test tools. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.

> ##### WebdriverIO and Playwright Mediawiki Core Tests Analysis

Reviewer: It is important to spell tools correctly.

```suggestion
##### WebdriverIO and Playwright MediaWiki Core Tests Analysis
```

![Screenshot](evaluation-chart.png)

> The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running mediawiki/core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.

Reviewer: Let's use MediaWiki Core everywhere.

```suggestion
The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.
```

* WebdriverIO is [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript) based and is built over [Node.js](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js) just like Puppeteer and Playwright thus it will be easier for developers since there would be no differences in programming language.

##### Disadvantages

* Investment in WebdriverIO tool. Most tests are already written in WebdriverIO. About 30 MediaWiki repositories use it, so migrating from it to another tool would require a great deal of time and manpower.
* Update of documentation. Most documentation is already written and has references to WebdriverIO. Updating the documentation would require some time.

### What Next

* Refactor the existing test
* Evaluate Playwright against Puppeteer

### Summary

Statistics show that Playwright is a better alternative tool over WebdriverIO in terms of speed. However, WebdriverIO seems to be a great tool given that it keeps evolving, new and modern features are being added to it and the community is still vibrant and supportive. As of the time of the evaluation, there are no plans to switch to a different test automation framework but this could change in the future.

### Acknowledgement

> The completion of this project wouldn't have been a success without the support of my mentors, [Željko Filipin](https://filipin.eu/), [Vidhi Mody](https://www.vidhimody.me/) and [Soham Parekh](https://www.sohamp.dev/about/). I do appreciate the constant guidance, meetings, advice, code reviews, challenging, pair programmings, to mention but a few, that were offered during the project execution.

Reviewer: My guess is that @und3fined-v01d would prefer link to his site's home page, but I'll leave that to him. 😄 

```suggestion
The completion of this project wouldn't have been a success without the support of my mentors, [Željko Filipin](https://filipin.eu/), [Vidhi Mody](https://www.vidhimody.me/) and [Soham Parekh](https://www.sohamp.dev/). I do appreciate the constant guidance, meetings, advice, code reviews, challenging, pair programmings, to mention but a few, that were offered during the project execution.
```

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

> ## Table of Contents

Reviewer: I've tried fixing problems in the table of contents, but there are too many. You have to be more careful. Please create the table of contents again from existing sections. Please make sure none of the links are broken and that all point to the correct sections.

- [Introduction](#Introduction)

- [Project Background](#project-background)

- [WebdriverIO](#webdriverIO)

>   - [Sample WebdriverIO test code](#sample-playwright-test-code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Sample WebdriverIO test code](#sample-webdriverio-test-code)
```

>     - [Mocha](#webdriverIO-and-mocha)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [WebdriverIO and Mocha](#webdriverIO-and-mocha)
```

>     - [Mocha](#webdriverIO-and-mocha)
>       - [WebdriverIO and Mocha code](#sample-webdriverIO-and-mocha-code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Mocha](#webdriverIO-and-mocha)
  - [WebdriverIO and Mocha code](#sample-webdriverIO-and-mocha-code)
```

I would simplify indentation here.

- [Playwright](#playwright)
  - [Sample Playwright test code](#sample-playwright-test-code)
  - [Jest](#playwright-and-jest)

>     - [Jest configuration](#example-of-jest-playwright-config-js)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Jest configuration](#example-of-jest-playwrightconfigjs)
```

Fix link and simplify indentation.

- [Playwright Vs WebdriverIO](#playwright-vs-webdriverIO)

>   - [Metrics](#playwright-and-webdriverIO-metrics)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't see this chapter in the text.

>     - [Statistics](#statistics-on-webdriverIO-and-playwright-popularity)
>     - [MediaWiki Core Test Suite](#webdriverIO-and-playwright-mediawiki-core-tests-analysis)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Statistics](#statistics-on-webdriverIO-and-playwright-popularity)
  - [MediaWiki Core Test Suite](#webdriverIO-and-playwright-mediawiki-core-tests-analysis)
```

Fix indentation, since the parent chapter doesn't exist.

  - [Why adapt Playwright](#why-adapt-playwright)

>   - [Migrating from WebdriverIO](#advantages-and-disadvantages-of-migrating-from-webdriverI)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Migrating from WebdriverIO](#migrating-from-webdriverio)
```

    - [Advantages](#advantages)
    - [Disadvantages](#disadvantages)

- [What Next](#what-next)

- [Summary](#summary)

- [Acknowledgement](#acknowledgement)

> - [References](#references)

Reviewer: Table of contents looks good in general. I would recommend to use title case everywhere.

For reference, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Title_case

For a tool that can help you convert text to title case, see https://www.titlecase.com/

An example. Change

```
WebdriverIO and Mocha code
```

to

```
WebdriverIO and Mocha Code
```

Please notice that `and` is still lowercase, while `Code` is uppercase.

## Introduction

> Test automation is a way to automate one's browser by simulating user actions like clicks. Applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations. So, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done and this ranges from unit testing to end-to-end testing of applications. Test automation is one of the ways to ascertain the stability and the health of applications which can lead to the success of the application when on production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs in applications, among other benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test automation is a way to automate a browser by simulating user actions like clicks. Applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations. So, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done. This ranges from unit testing to end-to-end testing of applications. Test automation is one of the ways to ascertain the stability and the health of applications. That can lead to the success of the application when in production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs in applications, among other benefits.
```

I might be wrong, but I think it's `in` production.

Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks being used;

> - Selenium
> - Puppeteer
> - Cypress
> - Playwright

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Selenium](https://www.selenium.dev/) ([WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/))
- [Puppeteer](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/puppeteer/)
- [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/)
- [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/)
```

Let's link to all the tools here, and remove links from the rest of the report.

> Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among Software developers and testers.
```
```suggestion
Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among software developers and testers.
```

`Software` doesn't need to be uppercase here.

## Project Background

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-Selenium modern test automation frameworks. MediaWiki is implemented in a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed. One of the tests performed is an end-to-end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-Selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).
```

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer: ```
Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories.
```

This doesn't sound good to me. Wikimedia is the movement, it doesn't support repositories. Maybe a better statement would be

```
MediaWiki is implemented in a large number of repositories.
```

Meaning, MediaWiki (the software) consists of Core and many extensions and skins. Is that what you wanted to say here?

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if WebdriverIO is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-selenium modern test automation framework. Wikimedia supports a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed and one of the tests performed is an end to end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is Playwright.
```

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by [Željko Filipin](https://filipin.eu/), who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki applications, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by [Soham Parekh](https://www.sohamp.dev/) who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by [Željko Filipin](https://filipin.eu/), who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by [Soham Parekh](https://www.sohamp.dev/) who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H. Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;
```

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by [Željko Filipin](https://filipin.eu/), who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki applications, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by [Soham Parekh](https://www.sohamp.dev/) who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki applications, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;
```

Links to Soham's and my website are already in Acknowledgement.

> - [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F)
> - [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F) by Sim T.H. Tran
- [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/) by Soham Parekh
```

> So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright). The evaluations progress involved the following steps;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is Playwright. The evaluations progress involved the following steps;
```

- Configuring and Setting up of Wikimedia Core to run on CI, in this case on Github actions.

> - Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright
> - Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO
> - Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright
- Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO
- Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability
```
```suggestion
- Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright.
- Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO.
- Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability.
```

## WebdriverIO

> [WebdriverIO](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio) is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the Webdriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebdriverIO is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the Webdriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;
```

- Extendable: Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful
- Compatible: WebdriverIO can be run on the WebDriver Protocol for true cross-browser testing as well as Chrome DevTools Protocol for Chromium-based automation using Puppeteer.
- Feature Rich: The huge variety of community plugins allows you to easily integrate and extend your setup to fulfill your requirements.

> The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capabilities, you can check out the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) documentation and the [Wikipedia Repo](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capabilities, you can check out the WebdriverIO and [MediaWiki documentation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).
```

WebdriverIO provides the ability and options to run commands in both asynchronous and synchronous operations. For asynchronous operations, you can use the JavaScript usual async/await, however for synchronous, it can be done through [node-fibers](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fibers). Both of these options have their own benefits and issues which can be found on the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/docs/sync-vs-async) website.

> ### Sample WebdriverIO test code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sample WebdriverIO code
```

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and saves the screenshot.

```js
const { remote } = require('webdriverio');

(async () => {
 const browser = await remote({
        capabilities: {
            browserName: 'chrome'
        }
  })
  await browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/')

  await browser.getTitle()

  await browser.saveScreenshot('./screenshot.png')
  await browser.deleteSession();
})();
```

> ### WebdriverIO and Mocha

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Mocha
```

The WebdriverIO WDIO runner currently supports Mocha, Jasmine, and Cucumber frameworks and WikiMedia Core test is currently using Mocha framework. [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) is a feature-rich JavaScript test framework running on Node.js and in the browser, making asynchronous testing simple and fun.

WebdriverIO provides an adapter for Mocha which can easily be added as `@wdio/mocha-framework`.

> #### Sample WebdriverIO and Mocha code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Sample Mocha code
```

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and saves the screenshot.

```js
describe('Wikipedia home page', () => {
    it('should display correct page title', () => {
        browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/')
        expect(browser).toHaveTitle('The Free Encyclopedia')
    })
});

> ```

Reviewer: This sample code doesn't have any `require` statements. It also doesn't save the screenshot.

## Playwright

> [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright) is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API. Playwright is known for the following capability;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Playwright is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API. Playwright is known for the following capability;
```

- Test across all modern browsers: Single API to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit.
- Use in your preferred language: Use the Playwright API in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and, Java.
- Automate without trade-offs: Capable automation for single-page apps that rely on the modern web platform.

> The above points are just a few capabilities. To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) documentation and my [MediaWiki Core fork](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above points are just a few capabilities. To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the Playwright documentation and my [MediaWiki Core fork](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).
```

> While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers(Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing Screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers (Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing Screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.
```

Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen while using Playwright;

- Console debug option which is very useful in an event when tests are failing with no clear error messages.

> - Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes
> - Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill)
> - Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes.
- Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill).
- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests.
```

- Seamless integration with Jest.

> ### Sample Playwright test code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sample Playwright code
```

> This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in WebKit and saves the screenshot.

Reviewer: Since wdio code sample uses chrome, let's use the same browser here.

```js
const playwright = require("playwright");

(async () => {
 const browser = await webkit.launch();
 const context = await browser.newContext();
 const page = await context.newPage();
 await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
 await page.screenshot({ path: "wikipedia-home-page.png" });
 await browser.close();
})();
```

> ### Playwright and Jest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Jest
```

> [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript Testing Framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript testing framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:
```

- Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support
- jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests
- expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions

jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features available to be used at your disposal. It was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).

> #### Example of jest-playwright.config.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sample Jest code
```

Since Mocha section has opening a page and saving a screenshot for an example, let's use that example here too.

```js
module.exports = {
 browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
 devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"],
};
```

Below are some great and useful functions that come with jest-playwright;

Reset helper functions. These functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various reasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like;

- `resetPage()`
- `resetContext()`
- `resetBrowser()`

Example usage of reset current browser

```js
beforeEach(async () => {
 await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser();
});
```

Debug helper functions. This help in debugging test incase there are test failure. It uses the `jestPlaywrightDebug()`

Example usage of Debug

```js
test.jestPlaywrightDebug("failed", async ({ page }) => {
 await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
 const title = await page.title();
 await expect(title).toBe("Nothing");
});
```

> For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright).
```

## Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

> ### Statistics on WebdriverIO and Playwright Popularity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Statistics
```

![Screenshot](statistics.png)

> The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing some of the most popular automation test tools. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing WebdriverIO and Playwright downloads. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.
```

> ### WebdriverIO and Playwright MediaWiki Core Tests Analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### MediaWiki Core Tests
```

![Screenshot](evaluation-chart.png)

The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.

The tests were run 40 times in both frameworks to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consistency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.

The above chart further shows that Playwright is much faster than WebdriverIO in terms of speed.

> ### Why adapt Playwright

Reviewer: Since wdio has sections Advantages and Disadvantages, it would make sense to add it here too.

Playwright offers some great reasons such as;

- It's simple to set up
- Stable features.
- Ability to install Chrome, Firefox or WebKit (Safari) automatically
- Bidirectional (events) – automating things like console logs is easy
- Maintained by [Microsoft people](https://blog.logrocket.com/playwright-vs-puppeteer/) with experience maintaining Puppeteer

However, Playwright also presents some cons such as;

- It is very new so the APIs are evolving
- Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms
- Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.

### Migrating from WebdriverIO

> From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future and Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed, Stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the Advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future and Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed and stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;
```

#### Advantages

- WebdriverIO is [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript) based and is built over [Node.js](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js) just like Puppeteer and Playwright thus it will be easier for developers since there would be no differences in programming language.

#### Disadvantages

- Investment in WebdriverIO tool. Most tests are already written in WebdriverIO. About 30 MediaWiki repositories use it, so migrating from it to another tool would require a great deal of time and manpower.
- Update of documentation. Most documentation is already written and has references to WebdriverIO. Updating the documentation would require some time.

## What Next

> - Refactor the existing test
> - Evaluate Playwright against Puppeteer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Refactor existing tests.
- Evaluate Puppeteer.
```

- Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright.
- Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO.
- Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability.

## WebdriverIO

WebdriverIO is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the WebDriver protocol and Appium automation technology.

WebdriverIO provides the ability and options to run commands in both asynchronous and synchronous operations. For asynchronous operations, you can use the JavaScript usual async/await, however for synchronous, it can be done through [node-fibers](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fibers). Both of these options have their own benefits and issues which can be found on the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/docs/sync-vs-async) website.

### Sample WebdriverIO Code

The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.

```js
const { remote } = require('webdriverio');

(async () => {
 const browser = await remote({
        capabilities: {
            browserName: 'chrome'
        }
  });
  await browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/');

  const title = await browser.getTitle();

>   expect(title).toHaveTitle('The Free Encyclopedia')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  expect(title).toHaveTitle('The Free Encyclopedia');
```

To explore more WebdriverIO capabilities, you can check out the WebdriverIO and [MediaWiki documentation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).

## Playwright

Playwright is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API.

While working with Playwright for the past few months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers (Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.

### Sample Playwright Code

The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.

```js
const { chromium } = require('playwright');
const expect = require('expect-playwright');

(async () => {
  let browser, page;
  browser = await chromium.launch();
  page = await browser.newPage();
  await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/');

  const title = await page.$('.localized-slogan');

>   await expect(title).toEqualText('The Free Encyclopedia')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  await expect(title).toEqualText('The Free Encyclopedia');
```

- The API can be used in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and Java.
- It's simple to set up.
- Stable features.
- Bidirectional (events) – automating things like console logs is easy.
- Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill).
- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests.
- Seamless integration with Jest.

### Playwright Disadvantages

Playwright also presents some cons such as;

- It is very new so the APIs are evolving.
- Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms.
- Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.

To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the Playwright documentation and my [MediaWiki Core fork](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).

## Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

The below table is a comparison between Playwright and WebdriverIO in terms of;

- Performance
- Developer Experience
- Documentation
- Ecosystem/Community

|Key Factors|Playwright|WebdriverIO|
|:----------|:----------|:----------|
|Performance|- Fast</br> - Stable</br> - Reliable|- Slower</br>  - Stable</br>  - Reliable|

> |Developer Experience|- Simple setup</br>  -Javascript-based|-Additional browser driver set up (v5 and below)</br> - No additional browser driver set up (v6+)</br>  -Javascript-based |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Developer Experience|- Simple setup</br>  - Javascript-based|- Additional browser driver set up (v5 and below)</br> - No additional browser driver set up (v6+)</br>  - Javascript-based |
```

# Evaluation of Microsoft Playwright

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#Introduction)

- [Project Background](#project-background)

- [WebdriverIO](#webdriverIO)
  - [Sample WebdriverIO Code](#sample-webdriverio-code)
  - [Mocha](#mocha)
  - [Sample Mocha Code](#sample-mocha-code)

- [Playwright](#playwright)
  - [Sample Playwright Code](#sample-playwright-code)

>   - [Jest](#jest)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Jest](#jest)
  - [Sample Jest Code](#sample-jest-code)
```

- [Playwright Vs WebdriverIO](#playwright-vs-webdriverIO)
  - [Statistics](#statistics)
  - [MediaWiki Core Tests](#mediawiki-core-tests)

>   - [Why Adapt Playwright](#why-adapt-playwright)
>   - [Playwright Advantages](#playwright-advantages)
>   - [Playwright Disadvantages](#playwright-disadvantages)
>   - [Migrating From WebdriverIO](#migrating-from-webdriverio)
>   - [Advantages](#advantages)
>   - [Disadvantages](#disadvantages)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Why Adapt Playwright](#why-adapt-playwright)
    - [Playwright Advantages](#playwright-advantages)
    - [Playwright Disadvantages](#playwright-disadvantages)
  - [Migrating From WebdriverIO](#migrating-from-webdriverio)
    - [WebdriverIO Advantages](#webdriverio-advantages)
    - [WebdriverIO Disadvantages](#webdriverio-disadvantages)
```

## Introduction

Test automation is a way to automate a browser by simulating user actions like clicks. Applications become more complex as they are built on layers and entire networks of sub-systems, including UI and API layers, external databases, networks, and even third-party integrations. So, there is always a need for thorough testing to be done. This ranges from unit testing to end-to-end testing of applications. Test automation is one of the ways to ascertain the stability and the health of applications. That can lead to the success of the application when in production. The general stability of the application doesn't entirely depend on end-to-end testing but it surely helps to detect bugs in applications, among other benefits.

Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks being used;

- [Selenium](https://www.selenium.dev/) ([WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/))
- [Puppeteer](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/puppeteer/)
- [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/)
- [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/)

Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among software developers and testers.

## Project Background

> The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-Selenium modern test automation frameworks. MediaWiki is implemented in a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed. One of the tests performed is an end-to-end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-Selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is [Playwright](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if WebdriverIO is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-Selenium modern test automation frameworks. MediaWiki is implemented in a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed. One of the tests performed is an end-to-end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-Selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is Playwright.
```

At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H. Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

- [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F) by Sim T.H. Tran
- [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/) by Soham Parekh

So, this brings us to the current framework being evaluated against WebdriverIO, which is Playwright. The evaluations progress involved the following steps;

> - Configuring and Setting up of Wikimedia Core to run on CI, in this case on Github actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configuring and setting up of Wikimedia Core to run on continuous integration, in this case on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions).
```

- Implementation of all MediaWiki Core tests in Playwright.
- Running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO.
- Analysis of both WebdriverIO and Playwright tests in terms of speed and stability.

## WebdriverIO

> WebdriverIO is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the Webdriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebdriverIO is a test automation framework that allows you to run tests based on the WebDriver protocol and Appium automation technology. WebdriverIO is known to be;
```

> - Extendable: Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Extendable: Adding helper functions, or more complicated sets and combinations of existing commands is simple and really useful.
```

### Sample WebdriverIO Code

This code snippet navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and saves the screenshot.

```js
const { remote } = require('webdriverio');

(async () => {
 const browser = await remote({
        capabilities: {
            browserName: 'chrome'
        }
  })
  await browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/')

  await browser.getTitle()

  await browser.saveScreenshot('./screenshot.png')
  await browser.deleteSession();
})();
```

### Mocha

The WebdriverIO WDIO runner currently supports Mocha, Jasmine, and Cucumber frameworks and WikiMedia Core test is currently using Mocha framework. [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) is a feature-rich JavaScript test framework running on Node.js and in the browser, making asynchronous testing simple and fun.

WebdriverIO provides an adapter for Mocha which can easily be added as `@wdio/mocha-framework`.

> #### Sample Mocha Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sample Mocha Code
```

> The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed

Reviewer: To be a useful comparison, wdio and mocha code samples should do the same thing, but they are not. wdio code is opening a page, getting it's title (and then not doing anything with it) and taking a screenshot. mocha example is opening a page and asserting that the title is correct, but not taking a screenshot.

I suggest to simplify and make both code samples open a page and check if the title is correct (and not take the screenshot).

> The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.
```

```js
const { remote } = require('webdriverio');

describe('Wikipedia home page', async() => {
  const browser = await remote({
        capabilities: {
            browserName: 'chrome'
        }
  })

  it('should display correct page title', async() => {
        await browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/')
        expect(browser).toHaveTitle('The Free Encyclopedia')
  })
});
```

## Playwright

Playwright is a Node.js library to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit with a single API. Playwright is known for the following capability;

> - Test across all modern browsers: Single API to automate Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit.
> - Use in your preferred language: Use the Playwright API in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and, Java.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Test across all modern browsers: Single API to automate Chromium, Firefox and WebKit.
- Use in your preferred language: Use the Playwright API in JavaScript & TypeScript, Python, C# and Java.
```

- Automate without trade-offs: Capable automation for single-page apps that rely on the modern web platform.

The above points are just a few capabilities. To explore more on Playwright capability, you can check out the Playwright documentation and my [MediaWiki Core fork](https://github.com/hariclerry/mediawiki/tree/master/tests/playwright).

> While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers (Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing Screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers (Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.
```

Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen while using Playwright;

- Console debug option which is very useful in an event when tests are failing with no clear error messages.
- Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes.
- Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill).
- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests.
- Seamless integration with Jest.

### Sample Playwright Code

> The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and saves the screenshot.

Reviewer: I suggest to make all code samples open a page and check if the title is correct (and not take the screenshot).

```js
const playwright = require("playwright");

(async () => {
 const browser = await chrome.launch();
 const context = await browser.newContext();
 const page = await context.newPage();
 await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
 await page.screenshot({ path: "wikipedia-home-page.png" });
 await browser.close();
})();
```

### Jest

[Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a delightful JavaScript testing framework with a focus on simplicity. Playwright can be integrated into a project in two ways and one of them is by using the [jest-playwright](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright) which has rich features like:

> - Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support
> - jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests
> - expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multi-browser and device (like iPhones with given screen sizes) support.
- jest-dev-server integration which can start your webserver like create-react-app before running the tests.
- expect-playwright integration which provides common expect helper functions.
```

jest-playwright is added to the jest configuration as a preset which makes all the features available to be used at your disposal. It was inspired by [jest-puppeteer](https://github.com/smooth-code/jest-puppeteer/blob/master/README.md#start-a-server).

> ### Sample Jest Code

Reviewer: I suggest to make all code samples open a page and check if the title is correct (and not take the screenshot).

> ```js
> module.exports = {
>  browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
>  devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"],
> };
> ```

Reviewer: This should probably be deleted.

```suggestion
```

> ```js
> module.exports = {
>  browsers: [process.env.BROWSER || "chromium"],
>  devices: ["iPhone 6", "Pixel 2"],
> };
> ```

Reviewer: This section should probably be removed.

```suggestion
```

Below are some great and useful functions that come with jest-playwright;

Reset helper functions. These functions come in handy when you want to reset the browser or page for various reasons such as deleting cookies. It exposes functions like;

- `resetPage()`
- `resetContext()`

> - `resetBrowser()`

Reviewer: This text should probably be moved to Jest section.

Example usage of reset current browser

> ```js
> beforeEach(async () => {
>  await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser();
> });
> ```

Reviewer: This should probably be deleted.

```suggestion
```

> Example usage of reset current browser
> 
> ```js
> beforeEach(async () => {
>  await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser();
> });
> ```

Reviewer: This should probably be deleted.

```suggestion
```

Debug helper functions. This help in debugging test incase there are test failure. It uses the `jestPlaywrightDebug()`

> Example usage of Debug
> 
> ```js
> test.jestPlaywrightDebug("failed", async ({ page }) => {
>  await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
>  const title = await page.title();
>  await expect(title).toBe("Nothing");
> });
> ```

Reviewer: This should probably be deleted.

```suggestion
```

> Example usage of reset current browser
> 
> ```js
> beforeEach(async () => {
>  await jestPlaywright.resetBrowser();
> });
> ```
> 
> Debug helper functions. This help in debugging test incase there are test failure. It uses the `jestPlaywrightDebug()`
> 
> Example usage of Debug
> 
> ```js
> test.jestPlaywrightDebug("failed", async ({ page }) => {
>  await page.goto("https://www.wikipedia.org/");
>  const title = await page.title();
>  await expect(title).toBe("Nothing");
> });
> ```

Reviewer: This section should probably be removed.

```suggestion
```

> For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright).

Reviewer: This text should probably be moved to Jest section.

## Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

The below table is a comparison between Playwright and WebdriverIO in terms of;

- Performance
- Developer Experience
- Documentation
- Ecosystem/Community

|Key Factors|Playwright|WebdriverIO|
|----------|----------|----------|
|Performance|Placeholder text|Placeholder text|
|Developer Experience|Placeholder text|Placeholder text|
|Documentation|Placeholder text|Placeholder text|
|Ecosystem/Community|Placeholder text|Placeholder text|

### Statistics

![Screenshot](statistics.png)

The above data was adopted from [npm trends](https://www.npmtrends.com/cypress-vs-playwright-vs-puppeteer-vs-selenium-vs-testcafe) showing WebdriverIO and Playwright downloads. From the above charts, we see that WebdriverIO still trumps Playwright when it comes to popularity among the testing community.

### MediaWiki Core Tests

![Screenshot](evaluation-chart.png)

> The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on [Github Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on Github Actions platform.
```

The tests were run 40 times in both frameworks to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consistency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.

The above chart further shows that Playwright is much faster than WebdriverIO in terms of speed.

### Why Adapt Playwright

#### Playwright Advantages

Playwright offers some great pros such as;

- It's simple to set up.
- Stable features.
- Ability to install Chrome, Firefox or WebKit (Safari) automatically.
- Bidirectional (events) – automating things like console logs is easy.

> - Maintained by [Microsoft people](https://blog.logrocket.com/playwright-vs-puppeteer/) with experience maintaining Puppeteer.

Reviewer: Is this statement correct?

#### Playwright Disadvantages

Playwright also presents some cons such as;

- It is very new so the APIs are evolving.
- Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms.
- Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.

### Migrating From WebdriverIO

> From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future and Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed and stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the various evaluations done against WebdriverIO, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future. Puppeteer and Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed and stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration.
```

> #### Advantages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### WebdriverIO Advantages
```

- WebdriverIO is [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript) based and is built over [Node.js](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js) just like Puppeteer and Playwright thus it will be easier for developers since there would be no differences in programming language.

> #### Disadvantages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### WebdriverIO Disadvantages
```

- Update of documentation. Most documentation is already written and has references to WebdriverIO. Updating the documentation would require some time.

## What Next

- Refactor existing tests.
- Evaluate Puppeteer.

## Summary

Statistics show that Playwright is a better alternative tool over WebdriverIO in terms of speed. However, WebdriverIO seems to be a great tool given that it keeps evolving, new and modern features are being added to it and the community is still vibrant and supportive. As of the time of the evaluation, there are no plans to switch to a different test automation framework but this could change in the future.

## Acknowledgement

The completion of this project wouldn't have been a success without the support of my mentors, [Željko Filipin](https://filipin.eu/), [Vidhi Mody](https://www.vidhimody.me/) and [Soham Parekh](https://www.sohamp.dev/). I do appreciate the constant guidance, meetings, advice, code reviews, challenging, pair programmings, to mention but a few, that were offered during the project execution.

## References

> - [puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose](https://www.testim.io/blog/puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose/)
> - [using-jest-with-playwright](https://playwright.tech/blog/using-jest-with-playwright)
> - [stateofjs](https://2020.stateofjs.com/en-US/technologies/testing/#testing_experience_ranking)
> - [playwright-community](https://github.com/playwright-community/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Puppeteer, Selenium, Playwright, Cypress – how to choose?](https://www.testim.io/blog/puppeteer-selenium-playwright-cypress-how-to-choose/) by Benjamin Gruenbaum.
- [Using Jest with Playwright](https://playwright.tech/blog/using-jest-with-playwright) by Max Schmitt.
- [State of JS 2020: Testing](https://2020.stateofjs.com/en-US/technologies/testing/#testing_experience_ranking) by Sacha Greif and Raphaël Benitte.
- [Playwright Community](https://github.com/playwright-community/).
```

Below are some of the popular test automation frameworks being used;

- [Selenium](https://www.selenium.dev/) ([WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/))
- [Puppeteer](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/puppeteer/)
- [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/)
- [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/)

Playwright maybe the new kid on the block but it's gaining quite a trajectory among software developers and testers.

## Project Background

The Playwright evaluation is a result of a need for to check if WebdriverIO is still a good test automation framework compared to some of the best non-Selenium modern test automation frameworks. MediaWiki is implemented in a large number of repositories. So, in order to ensure good code practices across all these repositories, an extensive amount of testing is performed. One of the tests performed is an end-to-end test. WebdriverIO is the current browser automation framework being used for implementing the end-to-end tests. However, with the recent increase in awareness about end-to-end testing, a number of equally competitive non-Selenium solutions have been introduced and one of them is Playwright.

> At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki, a number of modern and non-selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H. Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of choosing which automation framework to use in the implementation of the test automation, extensive research was done and an [evaluation of WebdriverIO](https://filipin.eu/selenium-javascript) was carried out by Željko Filipin, who is a Senior Engineer in Test at Wikimedia Foundation and also one of my mentors. To verify if WebdriverIO is still a great testing framework for MediaWiki, a number of modern and non-Selenium automation frameworks have been evaluated against WebdriverIO. These evaluations were done by Soham Parekh who was Google Summer of Code 2020 intern and is also one of my mentors and [Sim T.H. Tran](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran). These evaluations can be found in the links below;
```

> - [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F) by Sim T.H. Tran
> - [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/) by Soham Parekh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Cypress Evaluation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/User:SimTran/Cypress_vs_WebdriverIO:_What_are_the_differences%3F) by Sim T.H. Tran.
- [Puppeteer Evaluation](https://www.sohamp.dev/blog/2020-08-24-wmf-gsoc2020/) by Soham Parekh.
```

The above points are just a few of WebdriverIO capability. To explore more WebdriverIO capabilities, you can check out the WebdriverIO and [MediaWiki documentation](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Selenium).

WebdriverIO provides the ability and options to run commands in both asynchronous and synchronous operations. For asynchronous operations, you can use the JavaScript usual async/await, however for synchronous, it can be done through [node-fibers](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fibers). Both of these options have their own benefits and issues which can be found on the [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/docs/sync-vs-async) website.

### Sample WebdriverIO Code

The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.

```js
const assert = require('assert');
const { remote } = require('webdriverio');

(async () => {
 const browser = await remote({
        capabilities: {
            browserName: 'chrome'
        }
  });
  await browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/');

  const title = await browser.getTitle();

>   assert(title === 'The Free Encyclopedia');

Reviewer: Is there a reason to use `assert` here and `expect` in the next code sample? I think picking one and using it in both places would be better.

})();
```

### Mocha

The WebdriverIO WDIO runner currently supports Mocha, Jasmine, and Cucumber frameworks and WikiMedia Core test is currently using Mocha framework. [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) is a feature-rich JavaScript test framework running on Node.js and in the browser, making asynchronous testing simple and fun.

WebdriverIO provides an adapter for Mocha which can easily be added as `@wdio/mocha-framework`.

### Sample Mocha Code

The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.

```js
const { remote } = require('webdriverio');

describe('Wikipedia home page', async() => {
  const browser = await remote({
        capabilities: {
            browserName: 'chrome'
        }
  });

  it('should display correct page title', async() => {
    await browser.url('https://www.wikipedia.org/');

    expect(browser).toHaveTitle('The Free Encyclopedia');
    
    await browser.deleteSession();
  });
})();
```

### WebdriverIO Advantages

WebdriverIO offers some great pros such as;

- Stable features.
- Synchronous implementation of asynchronous browser commands.
- Excellent API documentation.

> - Support for Modern Web and Mobile Frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for modern web and mobile frameworks.
```

### WebdriverIO Disadvantages

WebdriverIO also presents some cons such as;

> - Additional effort to set up browser driver with selenium-standalone or ChromeDriver.

Reviewer: No longer true since v6.

> - Must run with WDIO to debug.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean here.

While working with Playwright for the past two months, it has come across as easy to install and setup. The package takes care of installing all the browsers (Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit). Capturing screenshots is an out-of-the-box experience. However, video recording requires separate installation of [playwright-video and ffmpeg](https://playwright.tech/blog/record-your-browser-tests-with-playwright) but they all blend in with Playwright seamlessly.

Below are some of the benefits I have experienced and seen while using Playwright;

- Console debug option which is very useful in an event when tests are failing with no clear error messages.
- Scenarios that span multiple pages, domains, and iframes.
- Auto-wait for elements to be ready before executing actions (like click, fill).
- Intercept network activity for stubbing and mocking network requests.
- Seamless integration with Jest.

### Sample Playwright Code

The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.

```js
const assert = require('assert');
const { chromium } = require('playwright');

(async () => {
  let browser, page;
  browser = await chromium.launch();

>   page = await browser.newPage();

Reviewer: Here again you're using `assert` in one code sample and `expect` in another.

### Sample Jest Code

The code snippet below navigates to wikipedia.org in Chrome and checks if the correct title is being displayed.

```js
const { chromium } = require('playwright');

describe('Wikipedia home page', async() => {
  let browser, page;
  browser = await chromium.launch();
  page = await browser.newPage();

  it('should display correct page title', async() => {
  await page.goto('https://www.wikipedia.org/');

  const title = await page.title();
  await expect(title).toBe('The Free Encyclopedia');

  await browser.close();
})
```

### Playwright Advantages

Playwright offers some great pros such as;

- It's simple to set up.
- Stable features.
- Ability to install Chrome, Firefox or WebKit (Safari) automatically.
- Bidirectional (events) – automating things like console logs is easy.
- Maintained by [Microsoft people](https://blog.logrocket.com/playwright-vs-puppeteer/) with experience maintaining Puppeteer.

### Playwright Disadvantages

Playwright also presents some cons such as;

- It is very new so the APIs are evolving.
- Has no support for IE11 or non-browser platforms.
- Documentations and community are not as good as the other framework yet.

> For more of these gems that come with jest-playwright, please visit the [Github Repo](https://github.com/playwright-community/jest-playwright).

Reviewer: This line should probably be moved to another section.

## Playwright Vs WebdriverIO

The below table is a comparison between Playwright and WebdriverIO in terms of;

- Performance
- Developer Experience
- Documentation
- Ecosystem/Community

|Key Factors|Playwright|WebdriverIO|
|:----------|:----------|:----------|
|Performance|- Fast</br> - Stable</br> - Reliable|- A bit slower</br>  - Stable</br>  - Reliable|
|Developer Experience|- Simple to setup</br>  -Javascript-based|-Requires additional set up browser driver like ChromeDriver</br>  -Javascript-based |
|Documentation|- Because it's a new framework, it has a fairly good documentation with some great example projects</br> |- Has great documentation with detailed instructions with up to date information and example projects|
|Community|- Has smaller community and is maintained by few people|- Has a bigger community and is well maintained by many people|

> 

Author: This is still a work in progress. Adding more data and formatting.

### MediaWiki Core Tests

![Screenshot](evaluation-chart.png)

The above visualized chart represents data that was collected by running MediaWiki Core tests in WebdriverIO and Playwright. A total of 10 tests were run using both frameworks on Github Actions platform.

The tests were run 40 times in both frameworks to ascertain stability and reliability. No flakiness and failures were encountered during the tests run. As shown above, there is consistency in time when the tests were run in WebdriverIO and Playwright.

The above chart further shows that Playwright is much faster than WebdriverIO in terms of speed.

### Migrating From WebdriverIO

From the various evaluations done with Playwright, there seems to be great potential replacement in the future. Playwright seem to stand out in terms of both speed and stability. However, the question being asked is, is it worth migrating from WebdriverIO to another test automation framework? Let’s look at the advantages and disadvantages of a potential migration.

> #### Advantages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Advantages
```

- WebdriverIO is [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript) based and is built over [Node.js](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js) just like Playwright thus making it easier for developers to stick to the same programming language in the face of a potential switch to Playwright.
- The MediaWiki Core test implementation follows the Page Object Pattern, this would make it easy to write Playwright tests using the existing structure.

> - Playwright has a number of useful features that come with it, some of these features are missing in WebdriverIO thus making it a better option for a switch.

Reviewer: Example?

> - With the release of WebdriverIO v7, the support for Node v10 has been dropped. This will require most MediaWiki projects to upgrade the Node version from Node v10. Migrating to Playwright would be a great alternative in the short run.

Reviewer: Which version of Node does Playwright use?

> #### Disadvantages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Disadvantages
```
